name=Sarma
location=N/A
review=4.4
food_type=ground-meat-dishes
description=One of the staples of traditional Turkish cuisine, sarma consists of a filling that is snugly surrounded by leaves or leafy vegetables. There are numerous versions of this dish but the mixture typically combines ingredients such as minced meat, rice or bulgur, various herbs, seasonings, red pepper, paprika, ground sumac, or tomato sauce, while the typical wrapping usually includes vine, cabbage, or sauerkraut leaves, or a variety of leafy vegetables such as collard greens and swiss chard.Having its roots in the Ottoman Empire, sarma is also traditionally consumed in the Balkans, the countries of Central Europe, the South Caucasus, and the Middle East. Although it is commonly enjoyed as a filling lunch or dinner (typically during the winter season), sarma is often prepared on special occasions and holidays.The dish is usually accompanied by plain yogurt, mashed potatoes, and crusty bread on the side.
name=Qofte fërguara
location=N/A
review=4.0
food_type=meatballs
description=These delectable fried meatballs are prepared in both Albania and Kosovo either as a main dish or an appetizer. The origin of qofte fërguara can be ascribed to Turkish and Middle Eastern influence on the region, evident in both the ingredients and the method of preparation.The mixture for the meatballs is made by combining either minced lamb or beef, and sometimes even chicken meat with feta cheese, garlic, onions, breadcrumbs, and mint leaves. The mixture is seasoned with salt, pepper, often oregano, and sometimes cinnamon.The resulting mass can be shaped into balls, patties, ovoids, or even sausages, which are fried and served warm with potato fries and rice pilaf, or roasted vegetables, accompanied by a yogurt-based dip.
name=Tespishte
location=N/A
review=3.3
food_type=Desserts
description=Tespishte is a simple Kosovar dessert made by boiling oil with milk or water and then combining the concoction with flour, eggs, and baking powder to form a dough. The pastry mixture can optionally be enhanced with finely chopped or ground walnuts, almonds, or pistachios, while some versions use sesame seeds or even desiccated coconut.The dough is then stretched out into a greased baking tray and cut into rhomboid-shaped slices before baking. Its top may be decorated if desired, and once baked, the warm dessert is finished with a lukewarm sugar syrup flavored with vanilla sugar and lemon.In Kosovo and in other Balkan countries, this sweet pastry is traditionally prepared for special occasions such as weddings, family gatherings, and holidays such as Bayram.
name=Flija
location=N/A
review=3.6
food_type=pancakes
description=Flijais a typical dish of Albanian cuisine, prepared both in Albania and Kosovo. Although it is commonly termed as a pie or a cake, flija can more accurately be described as a stack of layered pancakes. The recipe consists of two different mixtures; one for the batter - usually consisting of flour, water, salt, and eggs, and the second mixture, used as a filling, prepared by blending together oil, butter, and yogurt orkaymak.There are numerous versions of the recipe, but the ingredients always remain simple, which is in contrast with a rather laborious and time-consuming method of preparing the dish. The batter is poured in such a pattern that the layers consist of triangle-shaped gaps.As each new layer is applied, it is immediately baked by covering the pie pan withsaç, a dome that's been previously heated over an open fire, topped with ash and cinders in order to preserve the temperature. Once the layer is baked, it is coated with fillings, then covered with a new thin layer of batter, and the baking process is repeated once again until all of the batter is spent.Flija can be served with various accompaniments including savory ones like sour milk, yogurt, pickled vegetables, cheese, andajvar, a spicy vegetable spread, as well as sweet ones: either a side of jam or a drizzle of honey.
name=Kollpite
location=N/A
review=2.5
food_type=savory-pastry
description=Kollpite or kullpite is a traditional pastry consisting of flour, warm water, and salt. The dough is rolled out or stretched into very thin dough sheets, which are then stacked on top of each other and drizzled with oil or melted butter in between each layer and on top.Variations of this pastry also use yeast and sugar for the dough, and the pastry is baked until nicely colored and crispy on the outside and soft on the inside. Although it’s commonly filled with crumbled cheese, kollpite is often left plain, with nothing but oil or melted butter in between the layers.This baked pastry is typically enjoyed with a glass of plain yogurt on the side. Some versions of kollpite resemble a snail-shaped pastry roll or burek, and these are usually filled with either sweet or savory fillings such as fried sour cabbage, mashed pumpkin, spinach, cheese and eggs, apples and walnuts, or minced meat and onions.
name=Šarski sir
location=Štrpce
review=3.4
food_type=Cheese
description=Djath Sharri orŠarski siris a salty cheese from Kosovo made with sheep's and cow's milk. Originally, it was made only with sheep's milk since cows were not able to climb the highland. In color, it ranges from white to yellow, and has a typical aroma of dill, a herb that is quite common in the highlands. Šarski sir is produced in two varieties – hard (traditional) and soft.The cheese is typically sold in wooden or plastic buckets, and it is then consumed on its own, paired with bread, or added to pies and salads.
